# Using a multi-omic approach to unveil microbial degradation of components in oxidixed low-density polyethylene
Plastics are used in many applications in everyday life due to their ease of synthesis and durable properties. The chemical stability of these polymers makes them recalcitrant to biodegradation, promoting their persistence in natural environments and exacerbating pollution at a global scale. To address this challenge, plastic-degrading microorganisms and their enzymes offer promising avenues for the development of biotechnological strategies to improve biodegradation and recycling. In this context, soils contaminated with plastic waste, where the polymers are exposed to heat and UV, may foster microbes adapted to degrade oxidized versions of the polymers and thus serve as rich reservoirs of plastic-transforming microorganisms. Here, two microbial communities originating from topsoil and subsoil collected at a plastic-contaminated landfill in Norway underwent an enrichment protocol in order to select bacteria specifically involved in the degradation of an oxidized polyethylene-like wax preparation (PELW). Metagenomic analysis of two enrichments revealed that samples from the surface or below the surface were characterized by high relative abundance of either a MAG affiliated to Acinetobacter guillouiae (57,8%) or Pseudomonas sp. (32,7%), respectively. Metatranscriptomics identified Acinetobacter guillouiae FS11 as a key contributor to PELW degradation. Subsequent isolation efforts and proteomic analysis revealed a suite of enzymes (alkane 1-monooxygenase, Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenases, Cytochrome P450s) with functions compatible with the degradation of oxidized products and hydrocarbons derived from the PELW. Additional analyses with Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance and gas chromatography demonstrated utilization of alkanes and ketones in the PELW preparation following growth of A. guillouiae FS11. Our study sheds light on enzymatic mechanisms for degradation of PE-derivatives in soil-associated microbial systems while offering valuable insights for developing strategies to harness soil microbes and their enzymes for biotechnological applications.